Chapter 3 - DSDL specification (#46)
UAVCAN/specification: specification/dsdl/architecture.tex

\section{Architecture}

\subsection{General principles}

In accordance with the UAVCAN architecture, DSDL allows users to define data types of two kinds:
message types and service types.
Message types are used to exchange data over publish-subscribe one-to-many message links identified by subject-ID,
and service types are used to perform request-response one-to-one exchanges (like RPC) identified by service-ID.
A message data type defines one data schema of the message object,
and a service data type contains two independent data schema definitions:
one of them applies to the request object (transferred from client to server),
and the other applies to the response object (transferred from the server back to the client).

Following the deterministic nature of UAVCAN, the size of a serialized representation of any
message or service object is bounded within statically known limits.
Variable-size entities always have a fixed size limit defined by the data type designer.

DSDL definitions are strongly statically typed.

> DSDL provides well-defined means of data type versioning, which enable data type maintainers to introduce changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DSDL provides a well-defined means of data type versioning, which enables data type maintainers to introduce changes
```

```suggestion
DSDL provides data type versioning allowing type maintainers to introduce changes
```

    \item File name extension ``\verb|uavcan|'' (mandatory).
\end{itemize}

\begin{figure}[H]
    $$
    \overbrace{%
        \underbrace{\texttt{\huge{432}}}_{\substack{\text{fixed} \\ \text{port ID}}}%
        \texttt{\huge{.}}%
    }^{\text{optional}}%
    \overbrace{%
        \underbrace{\texttt{\huge{GetInfo}}}_{\substack{\text{short name}}}%
        \texttt{\huge{.}}%
        \underbrace{\texttt{\huge{1.0}}}_{\substack{\text{version} \\ \text{numbers}}}%
        \texttt{\huge{.}}%
        \underbrace{\texttt{\huge{uavcan}}}_{\text{file extension}}%
    }^{\text{mandatory}}
    $$
    \caption{Data type definition file name structure.\label{fig:dsdl_definition_file_name_structure}}
\end{figure}

DSDL namespaces are represented as directories, where one directory defines exactly one namespace, possibly nested.
The name of the directory defines the name of its data type name component.
A directory defining a namespace will always define said namespace in its entirety,
meaning that the contents of a namespace cannot be spread across different directories sharing the same name.
One directory cannot define more than one level of

> nesting\footnote{For example, ``\texttt{foo.bar}'' is not a valid directory name.

Reviewer: But most operating systems allow this as a folder name. Should we define a standard transformation from valid posix path names into valid dsdl that can be performed automatically as a pre-processing step (i.e. before we put the type into the grammar parser we perform a platform to internal representation transform). So "foo.bar" would become something like "foo_bar" etc.

Author: I am not sure what would we gain by doing so? Implicit transformations would make the relationship between DSDL names and generated type names harder to follow. The objective here is to say that if one wants to define a data type `vendor.foo.bar.Baz` so that the namespaces `foo` and `bar` are otherwise empty, they would have to create a dedicated directory `foo/` and then `foo/bar/` instead of just `foo.bar/`. The latter form could be supported but it greatly complicates the mapping between namespaces and directories. Additionally, it would be unclear how to represent that in the generated code: using identical shortcuts, or by unrolling the directory tree into one-level-per-directory form?

Reviewer: I'm not saying we support a shortcut where `vendor/foo.bar` defines a <strike>`vendor.foo.bar`</strike> namespace. I'm suggesting we may want to consider the frustration of a user where they have `google.com/wing` and expect the namespaces to be `"google.com".wing`. We could decide to simply say all `.` in a folder name become underscores. So wing would generate `google_com.wing` namespaces. Of course this is asymmetric so I can be convinced that it's just simpler to throw a very nicely worded error about why the dsdl generator refused to continue.

Author: Is explicit not better than implicit?

We state that one can't use anything except `[a-zA-Z0-9_]` for a namespace name. If the user wants to name their namespace after some obscure Internet startup, they will have to replace their dotcoms with underscore-coms manually.

Reviewer: okaaaaaaay

such fields are not named.

A constant represents a named statically defined value of a statically defined type.
Constants are never exchanged over the network, since they are assumed to be known to all involved nodes
by virtue of them sharing the same static definition of the data type.

Constant values are defined via \emph{DSDL expressions},
which are evaluated at the time of DSDL definition processing.
There is a special category of types called \emph{expression types},
instances of which are used only during expression evaluation
and cannot be exchanged over the network.

Data type definitions can also contain various auxiliary elements reviewed later,
such as deprecation markers (notifying its users that the data type is no longer recommended for new designs)
or assertions (special statements introduced by data type designers
which are statically validated by DSDL processing tools).

\subsection{Serialization}

Every object that can be exchanged between UAVCAN nodes has a well-defined \emph{serialized representation}.
The value and meaning of an object can be unambiguously recovered from its serialized representation,

> provided that the type of the object is known.

Reviewer: We need a section describing how types are "known". This is especially significant now that we no longer have "message ids" but are using port ID instead. With this we've weakened the link between a CAN identifier and a DSDL type making it possible, for example, to exchange the same type over different ports. We've talked about how such mappings will have to be installed into a system but I'm not sure we've discussed this in the document? If we have, sorry, just add cross-reference to this discussion.

Author: This is very valid. Please review this commit I just pushed here: https://github.com/UAVCAN/specification/pull/46/commits/33b69a58ff9e0aff8117d404a143f9ea26042e09
